COP 3502C Section 2
Computer Science I - Spring 2022 Syllabus
Course Prerequisites: COP 3223 (Introduction to C Programming)
Information Section 2
Class Time MWF 12:30 pm - 1:20 pm
Class Location CB1 - 104
Teaching Assistants Daniel Gordon
Brandon Gray
Ansh Parikh
Ksenia Soulakova
Course Web Page: http://www.cs.ucf.edu/courses/cop3502/spr2022
Lecturer: Arup Guha
Office: HEC-240
Email: dmarino@ucf.edu
Office Hours: Will Be Posted on the Course Web Page the first week of class.
I do NOT check my WebCourses email. Please email me at
dmarino@ucf.edu to contact me.
Teaching Assistants and Office Hour Information:
Will Be Posted on the Course Web Page the first week of class.
Course Objectives
1. Introduce known algorithms.
2. Provide software skills in C.
3. Introduce mathematical tools necessary to analyze algorithms.
4. Introduce the problem solving technique of recursion.
5. Introduce implementing data structures from primitive constructs in C.
6. Introduce search and sorting techniques.
Reference Books: Any book on data structures will do for this course. The following book is
available in the bookstore: Data structures, algorithms & software principles in C, Thomas B.
Standish, Addison - Wesley (ISBN - 0-201-59118-9). There are a detailed set of course notes and
sample programs that should be sufficient in explaining the material to most students.

Most Critical Course Items
1. COP 3502 is a very challenging class. The average student should expect to
spend 12 hours a week on the course. The upside to the course being challenging is
that if you can get through this course with mastery of the skills taught in it, you are
virtually guaranteed to graduate with a computer science (CS) degree from UCF,
since mastering the course material will give you all the necessary skills in terms of
diligence and problem solving that you'll need to properly handle future CS courses.
(If you are in another major, mastering the skills in this course will allow you to
handle most future coding challenges you may face.) You don't earn those skills for
free. You earn them by putting in a great deal of effort. Make sure to plan a schedule
that allows for this time consistently.
2. All of my course materials content wise (notes, sample programs, program and
exam solutions, etc.) EXCEPT VIDEOS will be posted online via my course web
page at:
http://www.cs.ucf.edu/courses/cop3502/spr2022
At a minimum students should visit the course web page every Monday, Wednesday
and Friday for added materials.
3. Webcourses will be used to handle the submission of assignments and posting
grades. In addition, copies of old lecture videos (from Summer 2020) will be
available for those who miss class for any reason. At a minimum students should
visit Webcourses every Monday, Wednesday and Friday for class and other
announcements.
4. If you are a Computer Science major, you must pass the Foundation Exam
within one year of passing Computer Science I. Since the exam is offered once
a semester (first Saturday of every semester), that means that a student will
have a maximum of 3 attempts at passing the exam. In particular, if a student
passes this course (COP 3502 Spring 22), they are eligible to take the
Foundation exam in Summer 2022 (May 2022), Fall 2022 (August 2022), and
Spring 2023 (January 2023). If a student elects not to take an exam one of these
times, their eligibility is NOT extended at all. Eligibility can only be extended
via the appeal process and is typically only given if a student was incapable of
attending the exam due to a health/family/military reason. A student not
passing the exam in this time frame gets redirected out of Computer Science.

Tentative Grading Procedures
The final letter grade will be based upon the seven items listed below. Plus/minus grades will
be issued, when deemed appropriate.
Item Weight
Week 1 Programming Assignment 2%
Individual Programming Assignments (6) 24% total (4% for each)
Recitation Programs (choose 2 of 4) 8% total (4% for each of these two)
Recitation Group Reports 10%
Quizzes (4) 28% each (7% for each)
Final Exam* 28%
Also, in order to pass the class you must earn at least a 40% on the final exam. I reserve the
right to either enforce or not enforce this clause, based on the individual situation.
Rather than use a "strict" 90 - 100 grading scale, I adjust my grade lines to account for difficult
exams. My webpage discusses this process in detail.
Note: This grading breakdown is subject to change. Any changes will be discussed in course
videos and Webcourses announcements. As previously mentioned, in the past I made changes
to the class syllabus based on class behavior. In some classes I changed the syllabus to include
class attendance in the middle of the semester and as previously mentioned, I threw out an
entire exam grade due to academic misconduct. In classes where I've had a vast majority of
responsible students, I have not needed to make any changes to the class grading system.
Programming Assignments (Week 1 Assignment and Individual Assignments)
All programming assignments will be turned in over WebCourses. All programs must be done in
C and must be compatible with the compiler on the Eustis system you will be given access to.
Programs must be done individually with course staff help only. Collaboration is not allowed on
any programming assignment. (A further explanation of academic misconduct on programming
assignments is discussed on my main UCF web page. Please read this.) Official assignment due
dates will be posted on WebCourses. (Please look these up yourself instead of asking a friend.)
Note: All of the individual programming assignments this semester were used last semester.
If I detect any wide spread cheating (getting assistance from last year's students or using
solutions posted last year in any way) on these assignments, I RESERVE THE RIGHT TO
NOT COUNT THE PROGRAM GRADES FOR ALL STUDENTS IN THE COURSE AND
SOLELY BASE COURSE GRADES ON THE QUIZZES AND FINAL EXAM.
My hope is that I can simply trust all students to do their own work and that the assignments will
provide a valuable learning resource to you. As long as you all as a class play by the rules, I will
also, and keep the syllabus (how I count grades) as it is.
THE ONLY VALID DUE DATES ARE THOSE POSTED ON WEBCOURSES.

My personal advice is to submit all assignments AT LEAST THREE hours before the
posted Deadline. Too often, students wait till the last minute only to miss the deadline due to
network issues. In CASEs where a SUBMISSION is late (even by a Second), A Grade
of ZERO will be given to the Submission.
Community Service Opportunity
If students want to get an automatic perfect 100% for the last programming assignment, which is
worth 4% of the course grade, students may perform 5 hours (or more) of community service with
a registered 501 (c)(3) organization. If you take this option, then you will automatically earn
100% for Program 6 grade. In order to get this credit, you must complete the community service
and turn in the requisite form signed directly to me (in my hand) by April 6, 2022. All grades for
the community service will be posted in the P6 column by April 7, 2022. If you don't see your
grade there by April 8th, then please do P6.
Recitation - Programs and Group Write Ups
Each recitation meeting will consist of one of the following formats:
(a) You'll be asked to work on a programming problem from the website open.kattis.com.
(b) A lecture format where the TA goes over some material.
(c) You'll be asked to work on some practice problems (similar to past exam questions) on paper.
(d) A final exam review (format up to the TA)
(a) On four weeks of recitation, a programming problem will be given. Each of these is on the
website open.kattis.com, but students may be required to turn in more than their source code.
Directions will be given in recitation. (In addition, further restrictions may be given on the method
of solution and the efficiency of the solution beyond getting an accepted status on Kattis.) Students
are expected to submit two out of four of these via Webcourses for credit. (The lowest two grades
will be dropped.)
(b) On the first and sixth weeks of recitation, the TA will cover some review material in a standard
lecture format.
(c) On most of the other weeks of recitation, practice problems (on paper) will be given for students
to work on. After the first quiz, groups will be assigned based on quiz performance. ALL
STUDENTS IN A GROUP WILL BE FROM THE SAME RECITATION.
Some groups will have either a TA or ULA assigned to them. Each group will be required to meet
outside of recitation once a week to fortify course concepts. To ensure groups are meeting, groups
are required to take and submit weekly meeting notes. The group grades will be based on these
notes. If a group forgets to submit these notes, unfortunately, they'll earn a 0 even if they
met. All students in a group will receive the same grade.
In my past research, groups who follow my directions tend to increase their course grades by an
average of 10%. I'll give my directions and groups are the free to do what they want. ULAs and
TAs will be assigned to the students who struggle on the first quiz. The idea here is that the

ULA/TA will ensure that the group follows my directions and those groups are the ones that are
in most need of structured review.
(d) For the last recitation, I allow the TAs to plan a review for their students as they see fit!
Quizzes
Four quizzes will be given in class. Limited aids may be provided by the instructor (list of C library
functions and formulas) for these quizzes as necessary. No calculators or electronic aids will be
allowed for quizzes. Since our class time is short (only 50 minutes) quizzes will be relatively short
and each will only be worth 7% of the course grade. This means that one can recover from one
bad quiz performance fairly easily.
Final Exam
The final exam will be comprehensive. As previously mentioned, in order to pass the course with
a C or higher, a student must earn at least 40% on the final exam. (The instructor reserves the right
to waive this requirement if the final exam is deemed to be exceedingly difficult.) Students will be
allowed to use some notes as aids during the exam. This will be discussed in the last lecture class
of the semester.
Correcting Incorrectly Posted Grades/ Regrades
Students have one week after a grade is posted on WebCourses to ask for a regrade on an
assignment or quiz. Due to the short time frame, there are no regrades on the final exam. ONLY
the course instructor can regrade assignments, quizzes or exams. Do NOT ask teaching
assistants to do so.
If a grade is entered incorrect, students have until the last day of class, April 25, 2022 at 5 pm, to
request that the grade get fixed. In this case, either a teaching assistant or course instructor can
make the change.
The purpose of this rule is to avoid situations where students approach me after grades have been
turned in with incorrectly recorded grades from a long time ago. Changing these grades is difficult
and time consuming and it's in everyone's best interests if grades are corrected as soon as possible.
In addition, in many cases, students try to do this after the fact, if they see they are close to the
next letter grade after the class is completed. This kind of behavior should be discouraged. Rather,
regrade requests ought to occur very shortly after a grade is posted.
I am hoping that adding this policy will encourage students to step forward immediately in
situations where a grade is recorded incorrectly or a student genuinely believes that a grading error
has occurred. Taking care of these cases early is ideal for all students AND staff.
Keep in mind that in many instances, a grade won't be changed simply because of the grading
criteria that was applied. One may think that a particular response is worth some number
of points and that may not be consistent with the grading criteria. In these cases (many of
the cases presented to me), I don't change a student's grade.

Tentative Schedule
Week Monday Wednesday Friday Recitation
Jan 10 DMA DMA DMA Intro/C Review
Jan 17 MLK DAY Quiz #1 Recursion Kattis Program #1
Jan 24 Recursion Recursion Recursion Rec Problems
Jan 31 Recursion Linked Lists Linked Lists Kattis Program #2
Feb 7 Stacks Stack Apps Queues Quiz 2 Review
Feb 14 Queues for BFS SLM Quiz #2 Sum Preparation
Feb 21 Big Oh Notation Experimental R.T. Sums Alg. Problems
Feb 28 Recurrences Recurrences n2 sorts Rec Rel Problems
Mar 7 SPRING BREAK NO CLASS
Mar 14 Merge Sort Quick Sort Quiz #3 Kattis Program #3
Mar 21 Binary Trees Binary Trees Binary Trees Tree Problems
Mar 28 AVL Trees AVL Trees Tries Trie Problems
Apr 4 Heaps Hash Tables Quiz #4 Heap/Hash Probs
Apr 11 Base Conversion Bitwise Operators Bitwise Ops Probs Kattis Program #4
Apr 18 Binary Search Foundation Exam Backtracking Final Exam Review
Information
Apr 29 Final Exam FINAL EXAM
(Friday) Review 10AM - 1PM
Tentative Programming Assignment Topics and Due Dates:
Program Topic Program Tentative Due Date
0 Strings Deck 1/14/2022, L (1/19/22)
1 Dynamic Memory Allocation Smoothie 1/28/2022
2 Recursion Tree House Walking 2/11/2022
3 Linked Lists Lottery 2/25/2022
4 Sorting Scholar 3/25/2022
5 Binary Trees Word Sort 4/8/2022
6 Binary Heaps Priority Hair Salon 4/22/2022
• This schedule is tentative. The only items guaranteed to be on the listed dates are the
exams. All other items may be shifted based on how the class actually runs. These
details will generally only be discussed in the videos and Webcourses announcements.
• Note: All program and recitation program due date/times will ONLY be posted on
Webcourses. Please go there to find when each of these assignments is due.
• I don't know how I will handle things if classes are forced online. If that happens,
please pay very careful attention to all announcements over Webcourses!!! It's likely
that in this case, non-trivial changes will be made to the syllabus, and more
importantly to the quiz and exam formats.