Computer Science I - Foundation Exam Lecture
The website with information and all relevant links for the exam is
here:
http://www.cs.ucf.edu/computer-science/#foundation-exam
Here is perhaps the most important information that a student needs
to know WHILE THEY ARE TAKING COP 3502 about the exam:
1) Only required of Computer Science majors!
2) Only eligible to take the exam within one year (12 months) of
passing COP 3502 with a grade of C or higher.
3) Given the first Saturday of every semester. (We aim to start at 10
am, asking students to arrive where the exam is being given, typically
CB2, at 9:30 am.)
4) If you pass COP 3502 in the Fall 2023 semester, for example, then
you would be eligible to take the exam in the Spring of 2024 (Jan),
Summer of 2024 (May) and Fall of 2024 (Aug).
5) If you choose not to attend an exam you are eligible for, your
eligibility is NOT extended. (Thus, if you pass COP 3502 in Fall 2023
but do not take the Spring 2024 exam, you would have at most two
chances, Summer 2024 and Fall 2024, to pass the exam.)
6) If you are an SAS student, you must sign up for the exam with the
CS department, and then sign up with SAS. Since SAS is closed on
Saturday, if you take the exam with SAS, you'll have to take it the
day before (Friday) and sign a form stating you won't discuss the
exam with anyone until all other students complete the exam.

Foundation Exam Structure/Rules
1) The exam lasts 2 hours.
2) The exam has four sections, now labeled A, B, C and D. You get all
four sections at the beginning of the exam.
3) Each section has 3 questions. Two of those questions will be worth
10 points and one of the questions will be worth 5 points. Thus, each
section has 25 points total to earn and the exam is scored out of 100
points.
4) Each question comes from a specific list of topics. To see which
question is from which topic, go to the link "FE Exam Structure" on
the Foundation Exam Webpage.
5) AIDS: Formula Sheet (also on the Foundation Exam Website) and
scratch paper. In particular, no calculators are allowed.
How to Sign Up
1) Go to the Foundation Exam website and click on "Ready to Sign
up".
2) Registration Deadline: Wednesday at noon BEFORE the exam.
(So, roughly 70 hours before the exam starts.)
3) When you can sign up: After results are posted for the previous
semester's exam. In practice, this is usually about one month after the
previous exam is given. So, COP 3502 students can sign up NOW!!!
4) Please triple check that the email address you enter (your ucf
address) is entered properly when you register. This is how you
receive communication about the exam (which room, time, etc.)

How is Passing Determined?
The difficulty of the questions is assessed and the distribution of
grades is examined. Both data points are then used to determine a
passing line. Each of the following has been chosen as the line for the
passing score: 50%, 55%, 60%, 65% and 70%.
On the website, off the link "Past Exams", the third column for each
exam from August 2015 has an "Info" document. This document
shows the average scores (on the exam, per section and per question)
as well as the passing line for each exam. Examination of these
documents will reveal that a fixed percentage of students are not
chosen to pass, nor is the passing line fixed. Care is taken to maintain
the rigor of the exam while accounting unforeseen difficulties that
may have hampered students' grades. The goal is usually to set
passing around 60%, but adjustments are made based on the
distribution of scores and the perceived difficulty of questions, as
necessary. There have been both unusually strong cohorts of students
and unusually weak ones. (Spring 2020 was quite strong, January
2017 was weak.)

Process if you Pass
1) Go to the website after results are posted and click on the link
"Current Exam Results" to find your results.
2) If you pass, you will be added to a course called COT 3960. If you
pass the Foundation Exam in Fall (August) or Spring (January), you
will be added to the G "portion" of that semester. If you pass the
Foundation Exam in Summer (May), then you will be asked to choose
which semester you prefer to be signed up for COT 3960 between
Summer or Fall. Unless you need COT 3960 credit ASAP, you will be
asked to choose Fall, since most advisors are not available over the
summer.
3) Independent of being added to COT 3960, if you pass the
Foundation Exam, you will be assigned an advisor. You will receive
an email with your advisor's name and email address. Also, you may
click on the link "Find Advisor" about a week after you receive your
results to find your advisor.
4) You must contact your advisor to arrange an advising meeting.
Prior to that meeting, you will be asked to fill out a plan of study form,
which can be found off the webpage with the Foundation Exam Links.

Process if you Pass - Continued
5) After you fill out the Plan of Study form, you must upload it to the
following website: https://go.ucf.edu/CS-FE-POS
6) After the upload, you can meet with your advisor. Their job will be
to review your plan of study (if they choose to), but to more
importantly give you general academic advice about your future. (It's
the student's responsibility to make sure they are following pre-
requisite structure and graduating in a timely manner.)
7) Your advisor will be asked to verify that you met and approve your
plan of study. Once they do, you'll get a grade of 1 for meeting your
advisor in Webcourses and at the end of the semester, you'll get an S
grade for COPT 3960. If you fail to complete this requirement during
the semester you are signed up for COT 3960, you will be assigned an
I for this course and not be allowed to take COT 4210 or COP 4331.
8) Then you can sign up for COP 4331, COT 4210 after the S is in the
system for COT 3960. Note: If you sign up for one of these courses
while you are enrolled for COT 3960 and get an Incomplete that
doesn't get resolved, then you'll get kicked out of COP 4331 or COT
4210 the day before classes start the following semester.

My Study Tips (when you are in COP 3502 and right after)
If you are in the class currently, just do the class work required and
do your best to prepare for the final exam. After the final exam, assess
your strengths and weaknesses.
Pick 2 or 3 weaknesses to work on:
1) Go back over the notes on these areas.
2) Do some practice questions from old exams on these topics (click
on Past Exams from the Foundation Exam website)
3) Review your solutions with the posted ones.
4) If your weakness is code related, type up related code (say a linked
list, binary search tree insert) from scratch and test it on your own
IDE. The testing and debugging process is enormously educational.
Then, finally, take one practice exam in a timed setting, so you get an
idea of time management during the exam.

Day of the Exam Tips
1) Sleep well for several nights before the exam (7 or more days).
2) Have a decent breakfast, but don't stuff yourself.
3) Read ALL the questions by the 30 minute mark!!!
4) On the first pass reading through the questions, you are trying to
identify each of the 12 questions into the following categories:
(a) I know how to do this and it's fairly quick to solve,
(b) I know how to do this, but the solution is somewhat lengthy,
(c) I am not sure how to do this.
5) On the first pass, only stop to solve questions in category (a).
6) On the second pass, do all of the questions in category (b).
7) On the third pass, do the best you can on all the questions in
category (c). It's important to try to earn partial credit on every
question. Even if you're not sure how to solve a problem, maybe you
know what the base case ought to be, or how to set up the equation
necessary. Write down these steps as there are usually points
allocated for them.
8) There is a happy medium between "tunnel visioning" (which is
working on one problem and never giving up until you get it), and
"thrashing" (switching between too many questions).
If you spend too much time getting stuck on one question, you may
not have enough time for other questions. But…switching your mind
from one question to another has the cost of context switching - it
takes your brain a bit of time to forget about the question you were
working on and shift gears and "load into working memory" all the
relevant facts about the new question. So, watch out for both extremes
(don't get too into one problem that you spend 30 minutes on it, but
give yourself enough time on a problem before giving up on it).

Study Tips (if you fail the exam the first time)
Cramming doesn't work!
Identify your weaker areas by looking at your question by question
scores (can be obtained via meeting after the exam).
To incorporate an idea into long term memory, it usually takes about
three weeks' worth (20 times or so) of repetition.
So, for each of your targeted areas, schedule a week or two of 2 -4
hours to work on that area and drill on it. You may reserve 5 practice
exams for focused study. After reading over notes and searching
general items, in an untimed setting, work on questions from these
exams on the area upon which you want to focus. Go over the answers
and see what you did well and what you need to adjust. Keep in mind
there is more than 1 way to solve problems when doing this review.
Also, for coding questions, you can actually code up solutions and test
them. This is the best way to learn for coding questions.
As you are doing your focused review, sprinkle in some timed practice
exams. This forces you to recall information from all domains of the
class near the same time and switch from category to category. Again,
review the answers and ask yourself how well you did on the questions
as well as with time management. Reflect upon what, if anything you
would want to do differently. Reserve up to 5 exams for this sort of
diffuse practice.