# COP-3502: Computer Science 1 [C]
UCF Fall 2021

Professor: Arup Guha


Description: Big O analysis and Data Structures. This course continues off where COP3223C left off, reviewing dynamic memory allocation and structures. The course then continues to teach about Big O analysis and introduce algorithms that make coding more efficient. This course also goes over the following data structures & algorithms:
  
  Searching; Goes over indepth how to search arrays for items. Binary search and other methods.
  
  
  Recursion: Goes over in details and discusses its time and space complexity.
  
    -> Additionally: Touches on DFS using recursion but does not go indepth. This is a COP3503 topic
  
  Permutation & bruteforce: Goes over in detail of how to them and discusses the big O.
  
  LinkedList: Goes over in detail of how to use them and discusses the big O.
  
  Stacks: Goes over in detail of how to use them and discusses the big O
  
  Queues: Goes over in detail of how to use them and discusses the big O.
  
    -> Additionally: Touces on DFS and BFS using stacks/queues but does not go indepth. This is a COP3503 topic
  
  Sorting: Goes over in detail how sorting works and the big O analysis. Goes over: Merge Sort, Quick Sort, Bubble Sort, Insertion Sort, Selection Sort.
  
  
  Binary Search Tree: Goes over in detail: Disucusses PostOrder, InOrder, and PreOrder search. It also goes over other uses of this structure. Discusess big O.
  
    -> Additionally: Touches on the AVL tree and Trie Tree which are variants of the BST. Teaches how to make this structure but not too much practice. This is expanded in COP3503 
    
  Heaps: Mentions heaps and demonstrates how to create them,but not indepth at all. This topic is expanded in COP3503
  
  HashTables: Skims over the code of Hastables. Describes how they work and possibly collision issues. This topic is not explored indepth. This topic is expanded in COP3503
  
  Backtracking: Goes over what backtrcking in and how to use it. Expected to be expanded on in COP3503
  
  Bitwise Operator: Goes over what bitwise operators are and how to use them. Those a decent job at explaining them. Not utilized often.
 
  
  
